It's time for another Conceptual Aside.
We've already talked about this a bit,
but it's important enough to
delve just a little bit into.
JavaScript and undefined.
We've already seen that there's this first
phase of creating an execution context
in which there's a global object for
the global execution context.
There's a special variable called this,
which is always created.
There's a reference or a link to
the outer environment, if there is one.
And this phenomenon called hoisting,
where variables are set up,
and functions, as well.
And in the case of variables,
they're initially set equal to undefined.
But what do we mean by that?
Well, let's go back and
make our example a bit simpler.
I'll get rid of the function and
the function call, and
we'll just focus on
the concept of undefined.
So, I'll just take my variable,
a, to clear it and then log it.
I'll go ahead and run this in brackets.
And we see the phrase, undefined.
Now remember,
we already saw that if I don't declare
it at all with the var keyword.
It actually throws an error,
where it says a is not defined.
But that's confusing, because isn't not
defined and undefined the same thing?
Well, no.
Because when we say, and
I'm going to put the var a back,
in JavaScript, when we see
undefined as opposed to that error,
this isn't simply the word undefined, but
it's actually a special value
that JavaScript has within
it internally that means that
the variable hasn't been set.
To prove that, I'll show you something.
I'll do if (a ===,
I'm gonna do triple equals.
Now if you've never seen
triple equals before,
we'll talk about that at
length later in the course.
But this is very similar to double equals,
is equal to.
But it's a bit safer.
And we'll see why later.
Just for now we'll just use triple equals,
because this is good practice,
and we'll explaining why
when the time comes.
But for now,
just imagine using triple equals anywhere
where you would use double equals.
Alright, so triple equals and
then I'm gonna say the word undefined.
And then if it's undefined
I'm gonna output a phrase.
'a is undefined' and then I'll put else.
If it's not undefined I'll put
console.log('a is defined').
Notice that undefined
isn't wrapped in quotes.
This isn't a string.
It's a special key word.
It's a value.
A special value in JavaScript.
And when I go back and run this,
notice that a is undefined.
So when this if statement checked if
a was equal to this special keyword,
the special value, undefined,
it said yes, it is.
If I was to set a up here equal to a
value, then by the time we get down here,
a is set, and so a is defined.
This was false.
It was not equal to undefined.
But if I don't set the value again,
this will be true.
Because the initial phase of
creating the execution context
sets all variables equal to undefined.
And if you don't do anything else,
that's what that value will be.
Notice again, this is different than if
I simply never declared the variable,
var a, and attempt to console.log(a).
When I refresh this It gives me
an Uncaught Reference error,
a is not defined.
That's because that initial execution
context creation, that creation phase,
when it went through it
didn't find a var a so
it never set up the memory space.
So when it went to execute this code it
said hey, I don't have a in memory at all.
So it gave you an Uncaught Reference,
a is not defined.
I don't have it in memory.
That's what the browser is saying.
That's what the JavaScript engine
inside the browser is saying.
However, when I declare var a,
a is placed into memory
during the creation phase.
So the execution context saw var a and
set up a in memory.
And so even though I haven't set it
to a value, the JavaScript engine,
which is doing more than what
I'm just writing in my code,
already set it to this special
value called undefined.
So undefined is not like empty or
doesn't exist.
It doesn't literally not exist.
It's actually a value.
It's actually taking up memory space.
It's a special keyword.
A special value that means
this is the value that was
initially set by JavaScript.
And that leads to a little
bit of a warning.
Never do this.
Never set yourself a variable
equal to undefined.
Because, actually you can.
For example, I could set this
initially to 'Hello world!'.
And then, console.log it.
And, later, for some reason,
set it to undefined.
And we'll see that it is.
Watch.
Hello world!, and
then later, it's undefined.
That's perfectly valid JavaScript.
But it's a little dangerous.
It's better to let undefined,
that special keyword mean I,
the programmer, never set the value.
That will really help
you when debugging code.
If you make a habit of setting
values equal to undefined,
then it's really hard to tell if something
is undefined because you set it or
because the JavaScript engine set it and
you never set it to anything else.
It's always better to let undefined mean,
I've never set this value.
That's really useful.
And it will help you in your debugging.
So, undefined,
this is a special value that is also
a special keyword in JavaScript.
And it's the value that variables
receive during the creation phase.
The first phase of creating an execution
context sets up the memory of the variable
and in that memory space puts
the value called undefined.
I would have called it something
personally like not set.
But that's what JavaScript calls it,
undefined.
And if you don't, in your code, set it to
anything else, that's what it will be.
Or if you set it something else later, and
use it beforehand, that's what it will be.
All right, so
that's JavaScript and undefined.